<span class="c3">Financing a Self-sovereign Technology Stack</span>

<span>Adrian Gropper</span>

<span class="c1"></span>

<span class="c3">Technology for Human Autonomy</span>

<span class="c1"></span>

<span>Rebooting the Web of Trust aims toward autonomy for individuals.
In his seminal 2017 paper, The Path to Self-Sovereign Identity,
</span><span class="c4">[https://github.com/ChristopherA/self-sovereign-identity/blob/master/ThePathToSelf-SovereignIdentity.md](https://www.google.com/url?q=https://github.com/ChristopherA/self-sovereign-identity/blob/master/ThePathToSelf-SovereignIdentity.md&sa=D&ust=1549594107334000)</span><span class="c1"> ,
Christopher Allen lists ten principles of self-sovereign identity. But
to achieve autonomy, the individual must have agency and agency requires
an ability to act beyond identity.</span>

<span class="c1"></span>

<span class="c1">A self-sovereign agent, able to act autonomously to the
extent it’s human owner allows, will have many of the same ten
principles of self-sovereign identity. Characteristics such as Free
software, standards for interoperability, portability, and
censorship-resistance are a must for a self-sovereign agent. These same
characteristics, however, limit the ability to finance work on a
self-sovereign agent in established ways. Bitcoin, ethereum, and other
public blockchains are an example of self-sovereign technology. Finance
of public blockchain projects is based on issuance of the equivalent of
founders’ stock to the developers and the hope that many of them will
maintain the technology in order to preserve and grow the value of their
stake. Could such a finance mechanism be applied to develop
self-sovereign agent technology?</span>

<span class="c1"></span>

<span class="c1">This is, to a large extent, the structure behind
Ethereum dapps and ConsenSys. As long as Ethereum’s early adopters could
reach critical mass and governance stability, their finance of ConsenSys
and similar support organizations could, in theory, be used to construct
an autonomous agent for an individual. In practice, however an agent
requires secrecy to keep an individual’s policies away from public
disclosure in a manner reminiscent of zero-knowledge proofs. Along with
scalability and the need to sometimes operate without a connection to
the network, Ethereum is not an ideal substrate for a self-sovereign
agent and the public blockchain finance strategy is difficult to
apply.</span>

<span class="c1"></span>

<span class="c3">A Standards-Based Self-Sovereign Technology
Stack</span>

<span class="c1"></span>

<span class="c1">Starting with the second Rebooting Web of Trust, the
HIE of One project has been designed and managed as a reference
implementation of a self-sovereign technology stack. The agency concept
is instantiated as an authorization server based on the User Managed
Access (UMA) standard running as Free software on non-proprietary
hardware owned by the individual. Client access to the authorization
server is based on self-sovereign identity and related credentials of
requesting parties. Autonomy is preserved because the authorization
server hides their owner’s policies just as a wallet hides the owner’s
private keys. An open source reference implementation of standards is
nothing more than an open source project and not financeable in the
normal sense of the term. How are we to create a supported, sustainable
product for anyone to use?</span>

<span class="c1"></span>

<span>HIE of One, PBC was incorporated in 2014 as a Public Benefits
Corporation to act as the governance and finance entity. The corporation
registered Trustee as trademark for their version of the software and
services. There is also a Trustee hardware option. We then set about to
apply for grants, seek strategic and financial investors, and considered
a token sale linked to the “fat protocol” that is the combination of
UMA, OAuth, Decentralized IDentifier, and Verifiable Credentials
standards combined into the self-sovereign technology stack branded
Trustee.</span>

<span class="c1"></span>

<span class="c1">A technology, be it self-sovereign identity or
self-sovereign agency, is not sufficient to get customers and have a
business. Trustee must actually compete to provide a service that people
want to buy and use in the real world. HIE of One chose health records
for seriously ill people as the service. HIE stands for Health
Information Exchange. Seriously ill or elderly patients interact with
many different institutional systems and need to monitor and connect
their interfaces in a practical way. The healthcare industry is in the
process of adopting a standard for application programming interfaces
(API) called FHIR. FHIR is a RESTful API protected by OAuth and
therefore easily adapted to delegation of control to an UMA
authorization server such as Trustee. The growing availability of health
records via a standard API underlies the value proposition for Trustee
as a commercial product.</span>

<span class="c1"></span>

<span class="c3">Financing Autonomy</span>

<span class="c1"></span>

<span class="c1">Aside from the blockchain pioneers, there’s little
experience with financing self-sovereign technology in any market
segment and it’s not even clear that the path they took in the first
decade can be sustained or replicated. It’s a bit like Zooko’s Triangle:
You can have two of: Software Freedom, Substitutability, or
Decentralization as long as you finance on the basis of control in one
of the three areas. But granting control to others compromises autonomy.
</span>

<span class="c1"></span>

<span class="c1">Over about five years, as we continue to develop
Trustee using the open source, non-commercial collaboration model, HIE
of One has tried various approaches to financing the transition to
commercial product. We tried:</span>

<span class="c1"></span>

  - <span class="c1">Government grants (both on our own and as
    subcontractors)</span>
  - <span class="c1">Citizen coops (we help establish and participate in
    the Digital Life Collective)</span>
  - <span class="c1">Physician coops (via established medical societies
    and start-up physician initiative)</span>
  - <span class="c1">Global Healthcare NGOs (in US and UK, but Trustee
    is not “research”)</span>
  - <span class="c1">Blockchain Tokens (so many issues)</span>
  - <span class="c1">Blockchain investors (healthcare is sooo
    complicated)</span>

<span class="c1"></span>

<span class="c1">No luck so far. </span>

<span class="c1"></span>

<span class="c3">Bootstrapping Self-Sovereign Technology </span>

<span class="c1"></span>

<span class="c1">HIE of One is now trying something completely
different. To the extent a Free software product can be developed by
volunteers and brought to market without up-front tooling, the customers
might finance the scale-up and commercialization themselves. This is
similar to some public blockchains but the compensation of the
developers and early adopters is not directly linked to the protocol
itself. Users subscribe to the service with some degree of pre-payment
and a promise of future discounts as the network grows.</span>

<span class="c1"></span>

<span>Can bootstrap financing support self-sovereign autonomy? The
software is licensed under the Affero GPL. The service is substitutable
to the extent the DID, VC, and UMA standards are adopted. The service
and support are mostly decentralized with only governance of the Trustee
brand and contracts related to it under the control of HIE of One.
</span>

<span class="c1"></span>

<span class="c1">Business models for self-sovereign identity and
self-sovereign technology are experimental. The standards are just
starting to gel. The interest in systems that promote freedom of speech
and assembly is growing. Business structures for sustainable
decentralized and potentially autonomous systems are still to be
invented. </span>

<span class="c1"></span>

<span class="c1"></span>

<span class="c1"></span>

<span class="c1"></span>
